*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 59950 ***












                                 Junior
                              Park Ranger
                                Program


    [Illustration: JUNIOR PARK RANGER]

                            Montezuma Castle
                                  and
                      Tuzigoot National Monuments


The National Park Service protects many historical areas in the
southwestern United States. Montezuma Castle and Tuzigoot are just two
of these sites.

Now that you are an official Junior Park Ranger we hope that you will
continue to help us protect these special places so that others who come
after you may enjoy them also.

                As a Junior Park Ranger your duties are:


—To help keep your parks clean! Do not litter. If you find any litter,
  help out by putting it in a trash container.

—To learn more about your parks! Information can be found in visitor
  centers and museums. You may also ask the Park Rangers questions. Be
  sure to share your new knowledge with friends when you get home.

—To obey all rules and signs! Rules in the parks are for your safety and
  also to protect the resources. Please stay on the trails.


    [Illustration: NATIONAL PARK SERVICE · Department of the Interior]

This Junior Park Ranger Program is made possible through the support of
the Western National Parks Association (WNPA). This nonprofit
organization was founded in 1938 to aid and promote the educational and
scientific activities of the National Park Service.

Special thanks also goes to former National Park Service Ranger Angela
L. Davis for the text and design of this program.

If you have any questions or comments about the Montezuma
Castle/Tuzigoot National Monuments Junior Park Ranger Program, please
write to:

                             Superintendent
                              P.O. Box 219
                          Camp Verde, AZ 86322

 Printed with funds donated by Western National Parks Association—1/03
                              www.wnpa.org
                                                          Recycled Paper




                      Become a Junior Park Ranger


It’s easy to become a Junior Park Ranger. You will learn about Montezuma
Castle and/or Tuzigoot National Monuments. Discover the people who lived
here, the plants that they used and the animals that still make their
homes here today. You will receive an official Junior Park Ranger badge
for your work.

  ★ If you are 6 years old or younger choose 2 activities from pages
          with a {pot} in the top right corner.
  ★ If you are between the ages of 7 and 9 years old choose 2 activities
          from pages with a {cactus} in the top right corner.
  ★ If you are 10 years old or older choose 2 activities from pages with
          a {snake} in the top right corner.


If you have any questions please ask your Mom or Dad, a big brother or
sister or any Park Ranger for help. When you are done bring your booklet
to the Visitor Center and have a Park Ranger check your work and sign
your certificate.

    [Illustration: Certificate]




                        This is to certify that
                     ______________________________
              has successfully completed all requirements
                 for the Junior Park Ranger program at
             Montezuma Castle or Tuzigoot National Monument

                     ______________________________
                              Park Ranger
                     ______________________________
                                  Date




                          Pick a Pair of Pots


People learn about the past from looking at things that were left
behind. The people who lived at Montezuma Castle and Tuzigoot left lots
of pottery.

Below are some pots. Two of them are exactly the same. Look at them
closely, then circle (or mark the checkbox for) the matching pair.

      {pot}                 {pot}                  {pot}
       [_]                   [_]                    [_]
      {pot}          {pot}                 {pot}
       [_]            [_]                   [_]
      {pot}          {pot}          {pot}          {pot}
       [_]            [_]            [_]            [_]
             {pot}                  {pot}          {pot}
              [_]                    [_]            [_]




                            Who Lives Here?


People were not the only ones who lived here. Many animals also make
their homes around here. Can you draw a line from each animal to the
name of its home? Also circle any animals or homes that you see while
you are visiting.

             {Rabbit}                      {Honey Bee}
            [_]Rabbit                      [_]Honey Bee
  ______________________________  ______________________________
         {Cliff Swallow}                     {Lizard}
         [_]Cliff Swallow                   [_]Lizard
  ______________________________  ______________________________
         {Rock Squirrel}                      {Ant}
         [_]Rock Squirrel                     [_]Ant
  ______________________________  ______________________________

  Ant Hill
  Nest
  Hive
  Brushpile
  Rockhole
  Groundhole




                              Food to Find


Help the squirrel find the berries. Begin with the squirrel and find
your way through the maze to the berries. Just like when you visit
parks, you need to stay on the path. Do not cross any solid lines.

                               Have Fun!

    [Illustration: Maze]




                          Discover and Uncover


How many items listed below can you find in the puzzle? All have been
discovered either at Tuzigoot or Montezuma Castle. Words may be found
up, down, across, at an angle or even backwards.

  [_] Arrows
  [_] Axehead
  [_] Beads
  [_] Bracelet
  [_] Clay Figurine
  [_] Jewelry
  [_] Mano
  [_] Metate
  [_] Pendant
  [_] Pottery
  [_] Prayer Stick
  [_] Sandal
  [_] Shell Ornament
  [_] Skeleton
  [_] Vessel
  [_] Weaving

          B  K  C  I  T  S  R  E  Y  A  R  P  S
          G  H  L  E  M  O  Q  U  T  L  G  A  H
          B  P  O  T  T  E  R  Y  A  N  R  S  E
          R  E  D  W  X  Y  H  D  P  A  O  T  L
          A  N  A  U  V  C  N  I  N  X  S  Y  L
          C  D  J  D  Z  A  H  J  F  E  K  S  O
          E  A  B  I  S  U  V  S  Y  H  E  G  R
          L  N  Y  R  L  E  W  E  J  E  L  N  N
          E  T  A  L  S  O  P  F  Y  A  E  I  A
          T  Y  A  S  R  F  G  S  T  D  T  V  M
          K  B  E  R  U  S  N  B  D  Y  O  A  E
          C  L  A  Y  F  I  G  U  R  I  N  E  N
          W  J  S  M  E  T  A  T  E  O  M  W  T

Look closely and dig in to see how many you can uncover!




                              Then and Now


People lived at Montezuma Castle and Tuzigoot many years ago. They did
not have electricity, grocery stores or even metal. These past people
made the things needed for themselves. Today people usually buy things
that have already been made.

Below are many objects. Draw an X through each object that would not
have been available to the people who lived here.

    [Illustration: Ancient and modern artifacts]




                              You Decide!


The Sinagua (seen-AH-wa) Indians lived in this area for a long time.
After living here many years, the people left. Did something change that
forced them to leave? People today are trying to learn why they went
away.

                        NO ONE KNOWS THE ANSWER

This is your chance to tell us what you think happened to the Sinagua
Indians. People have guessed that a disease may have killed them, a
drought (no rain for a long time) could have destroyed their crops, too
many people living in one place may have used up all the food and
firewood or they may have been attacked by some other tribe. Look at the
exhibits and walk the trail to learn more about the Sinagua Indians.

In the space below write out your own story of why they left.

  The Sinagua Indians left because....







                            Plants Provided


The Sinagua Indians who lived here years ago depended on nature to
supply their needs. Plants provided food, building material, medicine
and clothing.

While you are visiting, look at the different plants. Many are the same
type that people used when they lived here. Four plants are listed
below, along with how they were used. See if you can find and draw 3 of
these 4.

                                     There are different types of
                                     yucca but all provided necessary
                                     items. Fibers from the leaves of
                                     these plants were woven into
                                     baskets, mats, ropes and
                                     sandals. Soap was made from the
                                     roots.

                Yucca

  The gum (or sap) of this tree
  was used to make a candy as well
  as to mend broken pottery. Its
  beans were crushed and made into
  a flour.

                                               Mesquite Tree

                                     This tree was used in building
                                     homes. The wood remains very
                                     strong for hundreds of years.

            Sycamore Tree

  This bush had many uses. The
  root was chewed and put on ant
  bites and bee stings. The
  blossoms and twigs were used to
  make a bright yellow dye.

                                                 Salt Bush




                           Fill in the Spaces


Fill in the words below that match the definition given.

  JEWELRY
  PUEBLO
  POTTERY
  ERUPTIONS
  MONTEZUMA
  HOHOKAM
  SINAGUA
  TUZIGOOT
  LADDERS
  CORN

 Containers for food and water made from clay. __ __ __ __ __ __ __
                                               33    27    15 35
 What the Sinagua Indians used to climb into   __ __ __ __ __ __ __
 their homes.                                  16 34          19 13
 A modern Apache word meaning “crooked water.” __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __
                                               24       4  10    20 21
 Name for a home built of stone and mud.       __ __ __ __ __ __
                                               18          32 5
 Pima word meaning “those who have gone.”      __ __ __ __ __ __ __
                                               14       29 36
 An Aztec ruler wrongly believed to have       __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __
 visited here.                                       9     11    2     31
 An important food grown by the Sinagua        __ __ __ __
 Indians.                                      23    6  25
 Spanish word meaning “without water.”         __ __ __ __ __ __ __
                                                     30 26       8
 Seashells traded from coastal areas were      __ __ __ __ __ __ __
 made into this.                               1        22    12
 What happened at Sunset Crater that later     __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __
 made the land rich.                              7     17    28    3  37

Now fill in the letters of the numbered spaces below with letters from
the words above to discover a hidden message.

  __ __ __ __ __ __    __ __ __ __ __ __ __
  1  2  3  4  5  6     7  8  9  10 11 12 13
  __ __ __ __    __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __
  14 15 16 17    18 19 20 21 22 23 1  24
  __ __ __ __ __ __ __ __    __ __ __ __ __
  25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32    33 34 35 36 37




                           How Old Are They?


Montezuma Castle and Tuzigoot are both older than anyone living today.
Since the Sinagua Indians left no written records, these buildings are
considered prehistoric (before recorded history).

After finishing this page you will learn how many years ago people were
living here and how long ago they left. These monuments have been
studied by archeologists (ar-key-ALL-o-jists). An archeologist is a
person who studies past people and their ways of life by looking at
artifacts (AR-te-fakts). Artifacts are things that have been left
behind.


The Sinagua Indians, who lived here, left behind pottery, jewelry and
tools. The artifacts found here were compared to those found in other
monuments. By comparing them, archeologists were able to figure out when
people lived in these buildings.

Look in the park brochure and read the signs along the trail to find the
dates you need. Fill in the dates below and subtract.

A) When did Sinagua Indians first live in these buildings?

  Today’s Year                                   __ __ __ __
  Earliest Year Buildings Used                   __ __ __ __
                                                    __ __ __ years ago

B) When did the Sinagua Indians leave these buildings?

  Today’s Year                                   __ __ __ __
  Latest Year Buildings Used                     __ __ __ __
                                                    __ __ __ years ago

C) How long did the Sinagua Indians live in these buildings?

  Answer from A                                     __ __ __
  Answer from B                                     __ __ __
                                                    __ __ __ years




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.

—In the HTML version only, data entry is supported, but input is not
  preserved across browser refreshes. A record of completed activity may
  be saved by printing as a web page.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Montezuma Castle and Tuzigoot National
Monuments, by Anonymous

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 59950 ***
